docs: update README (#44)
stjude/ROSE: README.md

# ROSE: Rank Ordering of Super-Enhancers

ROSE (Rank Ordering of Super-Enhancers) is a computational pipeline for the identification and analysis of super-enhancers from ChIP-seq data. This repository provides a Python 3-compatible, location-independent implementation, with additional support for Docker-based deployment.

## Overview

ROSE enables researchers to:
- Identify super-enhancers from ChIP-seq data
- Rank enhancer regions by signal density
- Map stitched enhancers to genes

> ## Key Changes

Reviewer: Key changes from what? There needs to be a disclaimer about not being the original before this

- Compatible with Python 3
- Executable independent of installation directory
- Available as a Docker image: `ghcr.io/stjude/abralab/rose:latest`

## Installation & Setup

Clone the repository and set up the environment variables:

```bash
PATHTO=/path/to/ROSE
export PYTHONPATH="$PYTHONPATH:$PATHTO/lib"

> export PATH="$PATH:$PATHTO/bin"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROSEPATH=/path/to/ROSE
export PYTHONPATH="$PYTHONPATH:$ROSEPATH/lib"
export PATH="$PATH:$ROSEPATH/bin"
```
a nit, I just don't like `PATHTO`

```

## Usage

Run the main program with the following command:

```bash

> ROSE_main.py [options] -g [GENOME] -i [INPUT_REGION_GFF] -r [RANKBY_BAM_FILE] -o [OUTPUT_FOLDER] [OPTIONAL_FLAGS]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROSE_main.py -g [GENOME] -i [INPUT_REGION_GFF] -r [RANKBY_BAM_FILE] -o [OUTPUT_FOLDER] [OPTIONAL_FLAGS]
```

```

## Dependencies

- Python 3
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- R (version > 3.4)
- bedtools (version > 2)

## Input Requirements

### General

> - All input files must reside in a single directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Input Requirements

All input files must reside in a single directory.
```

> ### Annotation File

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Annotation File (`-g [GENOME]`)
```
?

- Must be in UCSC table track format ([UCSC Table Browser](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTables))
- Filename: `[GENOME]_refseq.ucsc` (e.g., `hg19_refseq.ucsc`)
- Place in the `annotation/` folder within the input directory

> ### BAM Files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### BAM File (`-r [RANKBY_BAM_FILE]`)
```

- Chromosome IDs must start with `chr`

> - Files must be sorted and indexed using SAMtools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Files must be coordinate sorted and indexed using SAMtools
```

> ### Peak File (Constituent Enhancers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Peak File (Constituent Enhancers, `-i [INPUT_REGION_GFF]`)
```

- Format: GFF
- Required columns:
	- Column 1: Chromosome (chr#)
	- Column 2: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
	- Column 4: Start position
	- Column 5: End position
	- Column 7: Strand (`+`, `-`, or `.`)
	- Column 9: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region

> - **Note:** If values in columns 2 and 9 differ, column 2 will be used.

Reviewer: is this actually GFFv2 or v3 compliant? I think it might just be a custom 9 column BED? Where does a user get a file like this? Do they have to make it?

Author: I believe this is a valid GFF format. GFF v3 and v2 have the following fields:

1. seqid/reference sequence
2. source
3. type/method
4. start
5. end
6. score
7. strand
8. phase
9. attributes/group

Reviewer: ok. Well the non-required columns should state that the value should be `.`. It's odd just skipping column 3 and 8 without mentioning them IMO

Author: Fair enough. I didn't write the original, and honestly, I didn't read it either. I just moved it, but we might as well improve the document while we're here. It appears that this repo is the "official" source of the tool now. It has a lot of stars, it is linked from the NIH page that describes ROSE, etc.

Author: I went to the source repo and that README includes:

> 1) PREPARATION/REQUIREMENTS
> .bam files of sequencing reads for factor of interest and control (WCE/IgG recommended).
> .bam files must have chromosome IDs starting with "chr"
> .bam files must be sorted and indexed using SAMtools in order for bamToGFF.py to work. (http://samtools.sourceforge.net/samtools.shtml)
> Code must be run from directory in which it is stored.
> .gff file of constituent enhancers previously identified (gff format ref: https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format3).
> .gff must have the following columns:
> 1: chromosome (chr#)
> 2: unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
> 4: start of constituent
> 5: end of constituent
> 7: strand (+,-,.)
> 9: unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
> NOTE: if value for column 2 and 9 differ, value in column 2 will be used

```

## Usage

Run the main program with the following command:

```bash
ROSE_main.py -g [GENOME] -i [INPUT_REGION_GFF] -r [RANKBY_BAM_FILE] -o [OUTPUT_FOLDER] [OPTIONAL_FLAGS]
```

## Dependencies

- Python 3
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- R (version > 3.4)
- bedtools (version > 2)

## Input Requirements

All input files must reside in a single directory.

### Annotation File (`-g [GENOME]`)
- Must be in UCSC table track format ([UCSC Table Browser](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTables))
- Filename: `[GENOME]_refseq.ucsc` (e.g., `hg19_refseq.ucsc`)
- Place in the `annotation/` folder within the input directory

### BAM File (`-r [RANKBY_BAM_FILE]`)
- Chromosome IDs must start with `chr`
- Files must be coordinate sorted and indexed using SAMtools

### Peak File (Constituent Enhancers, `-i [INPUT_REGION_GFF]`)
- Format: GFF

	- Column 1: Chromosome (chr#)
	- Column 2: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
	- Column 3: Type
	- Column 4: Start position
	- Column 5: End position
	- Column 6: Score
	- Column 7: Strand (`+`, `-`, or `.`)
	- Column 8: Phase
	- Column 9: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
- Required columns: 1,2,4,5,7,9

> - Columns 3,6,8 are not used by ROSE, therefore no guidance for their values is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Columns 3,6,8 are not used by ROSE; they can have the value `.`.
```

### Peak File (Constituent Enhancers, `-i [INPUT_REGION_GFF]`)
- Format: GFF

	- Column 1: Chromosome (chr#)
	- Column 2: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region
	- Column 3: Type
	- Column 4: Start position
	- Column 5: End position
	- Column 6: Score
	- Column 7: Strand (`+`, `-`, or `.`)
	- Column 8: Phase
	- Column 9: Unique ID for each constituent enhancer region

> - Required columns: 1,2,4,5,7,9

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Every column is "required" in that I (assume) there has to be _something_ there (maybe `\t\t` would get parsed but that's a technicality). I think the next line is enough, and this line is potentially confusing.
